The Cause: Nutrient Dense Foods

  Consider Thog, a primitive hunter gatherer living 30,000 years ago on what's now the coast of Spain. 
Thog wakes up in the morning to the sound of birds, and the pangs of hunger he's felt for the last 3 days, since he and the other members of his band finished the deer carcass they'd found a week earlier.

  Morning sunlight illuminates the sleep form of his sister and best friend, Groga. 
With a grunt Thog kicks his sister and best friend, Groga, awake and together they set out hunting and gathering for food.
Groga is an excellent hunter, but because of the strong scent Thog emits from his nether regions, they fail to catch any game that morning.
Concerned about their hungry children back in the cave, and their own growling stomachs, Thog and Groga decide to try their luck in the tidepools by the beach.

  They take a different route than usual, and pass a tree with a beehive high up in the branches.
They've never noticed this beehive before.
They change plans, send out a call to a few more of their band, including Old Lucky, who, at 38 years old, is the eldest member.
Old Lucky covers himself with mud and climbs the tree, knocking the hive to ground.
The band swarms the hive, and makes off with nearly all the comb and honey.
Happy times are here again!
The band feasts on honeycomb and delicious greens and tubers.

--------------------
  Thog and Groga's experience of food couldn't be more different than ours.
There is no scenario in which more nutrients or more nutrient dense foods are a bad thing for Thog and Groga.
The energy and sustentance food represents for them is perishable and constantly in flux.
Nearly every type of food they eat will rapidly lose its value and can't be stored.

  It's also generally a challenge to get the food, and the more nutrient dense the food, the more challenging it is to get.
By consuming as much nutrient dense food as they can, Thog and Groga's bodies will efficiently store any excess as fat, the most reliable and usually the only way they can store energy away for the future.
With a little stored fat, they'll be able to share more food with their offspring and tribe members, and generally help increase their reproductive and evolutionary success.
This story has played out millions of times a day across our planet for millions of years, for literally every creature alive.
Life, in a sense, has always been about efficiently and consistently accessing nutrient dense energy sources.

---------------------------
  Now, lets take a look at Chad and Julie, a couple of twenty-somethings cohabitating somewhere in America.
Chad works as a software developer, squashing bugs and closing tickets.
Julie has a small business selling vegan marijuana-laced edibles that she makes in her kitchen.

  Monday morning rolls around and both Chad and Julie wake up to the sound of Chad's alarm; he's got an early meeting.
They were at a dinner party at Jon's place on Sunday night, and they're both a little hungover and still stuffed from the clams and linguine.
Chad makes two cups of coffee, cream and sugar in both, for him and Julie, while Julie makes a cup of granola with milk for just herself.
Chad's been halfway trying intermittent fasting, based on a youtube video he saw a few weeks ago, and most days he doesn't eat anything before noon, drinks excluded.
Afternoon - anything goes.

  By the time lunchtime rolls around, both Chad and Julie are pretty hungry, and feeling good about it.
Being hungry is healthy, right?
It means your body wants calories.
So, they walk a few blocks down the street to this new burger place and get burgers, shakes and fries for lunch.
After lunch, they're stuffed and so they don't doze off they have another cup of coffe.
Chad has two, since he's sitting at a desk.
Both Chad and Julie sample one of Julie's new butterscotch peanut butter cookies, graze on some veggies and chips for dinner, and plumply watch Netflix into the evening.

  In terms of energy and nutrient density, Chad and Julie have such a different experience of food than Thog and Groga that not only are they like a totally different species, they may as well be on a totally different planet, too.

  Most importantly, Chad and Julie have easy access to a virtually unlimited supply of very nutrient dense food. 
This is a radical evolutionary change, one that's only occurred for any humans in the last several hundred years, and one that's become the norm for most of America in the last, say hundred years or so.
Chad and Julie are also consuming this food in a different environment than their distant ancestors, Thog and Groga.
Chad and Julie's sleep, and the corresponding metabolic rythms and changes, is dictated on both ends by the lights and noises of largely electronic and digital systems.
Their level of activity during the day is dictated not by the need to collect food, but by their work and their personal preferences.
They have varying levels of stress, that are largely independent of the amount of food to which they have access.

  In a sense, we've set ourselves up for a perfect storm of obesity.
By decoupling food from the rest of our lives and environment, we've also severed the feedback loops that naturally keep our energy inputs and outputs in balance.
Our most basic motivations and desires have been captured and used to sell us things, particulary food, that we don't need and that creates unhappiness and unhealthiness.

  So, should we adopt a paleo diet and eat like Thog and Groga?
Maybe we should try a modern hunter gatherer lifestyle of work donuts that Judy ordered in, grocery store samples, and pigeon, while wondering aimlessly around our neighborhoods?
Maybe a strict intermittent raw vegan cleanse is in order?

  The problem with these approaches is that they don't get at the root of the problem, which is the _food energy density_.

  Each has a bit of the solution, but clearly they aren't solving the problem.

  What's the simple one-word way to stop reading the rest of book, lose weight, keep it off, and find eternal health and happiness already?

  Fiber.


